Summary:
Salmonella is a bacteria that causes diarrheal symptoms. It was discovered by an American scientist named Dr. Salmon, and has been known to cause illness for over 125 years. CDC estimates that approximately 1.2 million illnesses and approximately 450 deaths occur due to non-typhoidal Salmonella annually in the United States. Can be confirmed by lab tests.

Incubation period: 12 hours to 3 days.

Symptoms:
Diarrhea
Fever
Abdominal cramps

Last 4 - 7 days

Those at Risk:
Salmonella infection is more common in the summer months (June, July, and August) than winter.
Children under 5 years old are the most likely to get a Salmonella infection.
Infants who are not breast fed are more likely to get a Salmonella infection.
Children who are 5 years old and younger, adults over 65 years old, and people with weakened immune
systems are the most likely to have severe infections.
Certain medications (for example, medications to reduce stomach acid) can increase the risk of
Salmonella infection.

Treatment:
Salmonella gastrointestinal infections usually resolve, or get better, in 5-7 days. Most do not require treatment other than oral fluids. People with severe diarrhea may require rehydration with intravenous fluids.

Antibiotics are recommended only for patients who:

Have a serious illness (such as severe diarrhea, high fever, bloodstream infection, or condition requiring hospitalization).

Are considered at high risk for serious disease or complications (such as infants, adults over 65 years old, and people with weakened immune systems).


Preventative Measures:
Cook poultry, ground beef, and eggs thoroughly.
Do not eat or drink foods containing raw eggs, or raw (unpasteurized) milk.
If you are served undercooked meat, poultry or eggs in a restaurant, don't hesitate to send it back
Wash hands, kitchen work surfaces, and utensils with soap and water immediately after they have been in contact with raw meat or poultry.
Be particularly careful with foods prepared for infants, the elderly, and the immunocompromised.
Wash hands with soap after handling reptiles, birds, or baby chicks, and after contact with pet feces.
Avoid direct or even indirect contact between reptiles (turtles, iguanas, other lizards, snakes) and infants or immunocompromised persons.
Don't work with raw poultry or meat, and an infant (e.g., feed, change diaper) at the same time.
Mother's milk is the safest food for young infants.
Breastfeeding prevents salmonellosis and many other health problems.
