Summary:
Shigellosis is a diarrheal disease caused by a group of bacteria called Shigella. Shigella causes about 500,000 cases of diarrhea in the United States annually 1. There are four different species of Shigella:

Shigella sonnei (the most common species in the United States)
Shigella flexneri
Shigella boydii
Shigella dysenteriae

S. dysenteriae and S. boydii are rare in the United States, though they continue to be important causes of disease in the developing world.

Incubation period: 1 - 3 days.

Symptoms:
Diarrhea
fever
Stomach or abdominal cramps
Tenesmus (a painful sensation of needing to pass stools even when bowels are empty)

Last 5 - 7 days

NOTES: Some people who are infected may have no symptoms at all, but may still pass the Shigella bacteria to others.

Those at Risk:
Young children
Gay, bisexual, and other men who have sex with men (MSM)*
HIV-infected persons
Traditionally observant Jewish communities
Travelers

*The term men who have sex with men is used in CDC surveillance systems because it indicates the behaviors that transmit Shigella infection, rather than how individuals self-identify in terms of their sexuality.

Treatment:
Diarrhea caused by Shigella usually resolves without antibiotic treatment in 5 to 7 days. People with mild shigellosis may need only fluids and rest. Bismuth subsalicylate (e.g., Pepto-Bismol®) may be helpful but medications that cause the gut to slow down, such as loperamide (e.g., Imodium®) or diphenoxylate with atropine (e.g., Lomotil®), should be avoided. Antibiotics are useful for severe cases of shigellosis because they can reduce the duration of symptoms. However, Shigella is often resistant to antibiotics. If you require antibiotic treatment for shigellosis, your healthcare provider can culture your stool and determine which antibiotics are likely to work. Tell your healthcare provider if you do not get better within a couple of days after starting antibiotics. He or she can do additional tests to learn whether your strain of Shigella is resistant to the antibiotic you are taking.

Preventative Measures:
Carefully washing your hands with soap before eating or after changing a diaper or helping to clean another person who has pooped.
Avoid swallowing water from ponds, lakes, or untreated swimming pools.
When traveling internationally, follow food and water precautions strictly and wash hands with soap frequently.
Avoid sexual activity with those who have diarrhea or who recently recovered from diarrhea.
